---
title: "San Zi Jing"
style: default-page page-1
---

-   人之初，性本善。性相近，習相遠。苟不教，性乃遷。
-   Rén zhī chū, xìng běn shàn. 
-   Xìng xiāng jìn, xí xiāng yuǎn. 
-   Gǒu bù jiào, xìng nǎi qiān.
-   
-   People first come, their nature being good.
-   Though our natures are similar, everyone's customs are many.
-   If not properly taught, our nature's will shift.
{:.verse}

-   教之道，貴以專。昔孟母，擇鄰處。子不學，斷機杼。
-   Jiào zhī dào, guì yǐ zhuān. 
-   Xī mèng mǔ, zé lín chù.
-   Zǐ bù xué, duàn jīzhù.
-   
-   The Way of Teaching, lies in valuing on focus.
-   In olden times, Mencius' mother choose the neighborhood to reside.
-   When her son didn't learn, she broke the shuttle from the loom
{:.verse}

-   竇燕山，有義方。教五子，名俱揚。養不教，父之過。
-   Dòu yàn shān, yǒu yì fāng. 
-   Jiào wǔzǐ, míng jù yáng. 
-   Yǎng bù jiào, fǔ zhī guò.
-   
-   Dou of Yan mountains, had the right method.
-   Teaching his five sons, raising all of their ranks.
-   Rearing but not teaching, the father is at fault.
{:.verse}

-   教不嚴，師之惰。子不學，非所宜。幼不學，老何為。
-   Jiào bù yán, shī zhī duò. 
-   Zǐ bù xué, fēi suǒ yí. 
-   Yòu bù xué, lǎo hé wèi.
-   
-   If teaching is not strict, it means the teacher is lazy.
-   If the child doesn't study, this is not proper.
-   If one doesn't learn when young, then what will they do when old?
{:.verse}

-   玉不琢，不成器。人不學，不知義。為人子，方少時。
-   Yù bù zuó, bùchéngqì. 
-   Rén bù xué, bùzhī yì. 
-   Wéi rén zǐ, fāng shǎo shí.
-   
-   Jade not cut, won't amount to anything.
-   A person who does not learn, will not know goodness.
-   Act properly as a child, there is not much time.
{:.verse}

-   親師友，習禮儀。香九齡，能溫席。孝於親，所當執。
-   Qīn shī yǒu, xí lǐ yí. 
-   Xiāng jiǔ líng, néng wēn xí. 
-   Xiào yú qīn, suǒ dāng zhí.
-   
-   From relatives, teachers, and friends, practice etiquitte and habits.
-   (Huang) Xiang at age 9, would warm his father's bed.
-   Duty to one's parents, is the proper way to act.
{:.verse}

-   融四歲，能讓梨。弟于長，宜先知。首孝弟，次見聞。
-   Róng sì suì, néng ràng lí. 
-   Dì yú zhǎng, yí xiānzhī. 
-   Shǒu xiàodì, cì jiànwén.
-   
-   (Kong) Rong when he was four, could share the bigger pears.
-   The younger respects the older, as is proper to know.
-   Start with filial piety and brotherly respect, then see and hear.
{:.verse}

-   知某數，識某文。一而十，十而百。百而千，千而萬。
-   Zhī mǒu shù, shí mǒu wén. 
-   Yī ér shí, shí ér bǎi. 
-   Bǎi ér qiān, qiān ér wàn.
-   
-   Learn enough numbers, learn enough language.
-   one to ten, ten to one hundred,
-   one hundred to one thousand, one thousand to ten thousand.
{:.verse} 

-   三才者，天地人。三光者，日月星。三綱者，君臣義。 父子親，夫婦順。
-   Sāncái zhě, tiāndì rén. 
-   Sānguāng zhě, rì yuè xīng. 
-   Sān gāng zhě, jūnchén yì.
-   Fùzǐ qīn, fūfù shùn.
-   
-   The three powers: Heaven, Earth, People.
-   The three lights: Sun, Moon, Stars.
-   The three guiding principles: 
-   {:.indent-2}noble ministers acting justly,
-   {:.indent-2}fathers loving their sons,
-   {:.indent-2}husbands and wives harmonizing.
{:.verse}

-   曰春夏，曰秋冬。此四時，運不窮。曰南北，曰西東。此四方，應乎中。
-   Yuē chūn xià, yuē qiū dōng. 
-   Cǐ sì shí, yùn bù qióng. 
-   Yuē nán běi, yuē xī dōng.
-   Cǐ sìfāng, yīng hū zhōng.
-   
-   Speaking of spring and summer, speaking of autumn and winter.
-   These four seasons cycle without end.
-   Speaking of south and north, speaking of west and east.
-   These four directions, correspond to the Center. 
{:.verse}

-   曰水火，木金土。此五行，本乎數。曰仁義，禮智信。此五常，不容紊。
-   Yuē shuǐ huǒ, mù jīn tǔ. 
-   Cǐ wǔ háng, běn hū shù. 
-   Yuē rényì, lǐ zhìxìn. 
-   Cǐ wǔ cháng, bù róng wěn.
-   
-   Speaking of water, fire, wood, metal, and earth.
-   These five elements, have their roots in numbers.
-   Speaking of benevolence, duty, propriety, wisdom, and truth.
-   These five constants, must not be compromised.
{:.verse}

-   稻粱菽，麥黍稷。此六穀，人所食。馬牛羊，雞犬豕。此六畜，人所飼。
-   Dào liáng shū, mài shǔ jì. 
-   Cǐ liù gǔ, rén suǒ shí.
-   Mǎ niú yáng, jī quǎn shǐ. Cǐ liùchù, rén suǒ sì.
-   
-   Rice, millet, beans, wheat, barley, and broomcorn,
-   these six grains are what people eat.
-   Horse, ox, sheep, chicken, dogs, and pig.
-   These six animals, are what people raise.
{:.verse}

-   曰喜怒，曰哀懼。愛惡欲，七情具。匏土革，木石金。與絲竹，乃八音。
-   Yuē xǐ nù, yuē āi jù. 
-   Ài è yù, qī qíng jù. 
-   Páo tǔ gé, mù shí jīn. 
-   Yǔ sī zhú, nǎi bā yīn.
-   
-   Speaking of joy and anger, speaking of sorrow and fear,
-   of love, hate and desire, these seven comprise emotions.
-   Gourds, earth, skin, wood, stone, metal,
-   come together with silk and bamboo, creating the eight sounds.
{:.verse}

-   高曾祖，父而身。身而子，子而孫。自子孫，至元曾。乃九族，而之倫
-   Gāo zēngzǔ, fù ér shēn. 
-   Shēn ér zǐ, zǐ ér sūn. 
-   Zì zǐsūn, zhì yuán céng. 
-   Nǎi jiǔzú, ér zhī lún.
-   
-   Great-great grandfather, great grandfather, father and self.
-   Self to child, child to grandchild, onto great grand child and great great grandchild.
-   These nine generations, make up your family.
{:.verse}

-   父子恩，夫婦從。兄則友，弟則恭。長幼序，友與朋。君則敬，臣則忠。此十義，人所同。
-   Fùzǐ ēn, fūfù cóng. 
-   Xiōng zé yǒu, dì zé gōng. 
-   Zhǎngyòu xù, yǒu yǔ péng. 
-   Jūn zé jìng, chén zé zhōng. 
-   Cǐ shí yì, rén suǒ tóng.
-   
-   The father shows kindness; the mother demonstrates obedience.
-   Elder brothers should be friendly; younger brothers should be respectful.
-   Seniors and juniors follow order; friends and companions are loyal.
-   Rulers must be honorable, and ministers must be loyal.
-   These ten principles are universal among people.
{:.verse}

-   凡訓蒙，須講究。詳訓詁，名句讀。為學者，必有初。小學終，至四書。
-   Fán xùn méng, xū jiǎng jiù. 
-   Xiáng xùn gǔ, míng jù dòu. 
-   Wéi xué zhě, bì yǒu chū. 
-   Xiǎo xué zhōng, zhì sì shū.
-   
-   When teaching the not learned, one must be thorough.
-   Comprehending and analyzing the classical texts,
-   For those who pursue learning, there must be a starting point.
-   When finished with primary education, move to the Four Classical texts. 
{:.verse}

-   論語者，二十篇。群弟子，記善言。孟子者，七篇止。講道德，說仁義。
-   Lúnyǔ zhě, èrshí piān. Qún dìzǐ, jì shàn yán. Mèngzǐ zhě, qī piān zhǐ. Jiǎng dàodé, shuō rényì.
-   
-   *The Analects* of Confucius, consists of 20 articles,
-   written by disciples, recording his virtuous words. 
-   Mencius' works consists of only seven articles.
-   Emphazing morality, expounding on benevolence and righteousness.
{:.verse}

-   作中庸，子思筆。中不偏，庸不易。作大學，乃曾子。自修齊，至平治。
-   Zuò zhōng yōng, zǐ sī bǐ. 
-   Zhōng bù piān, yōng bù yì. 
-   Zuò dàxué, nǎi céngzǐ. 
-   Zìxiū qí, zhì píngzhì.
-   
-   *The Doctrine of the Mean*, writen by Zisi. 
-   The Center does not stray, holding it is not easy.
-   *The Great Learning*, came from Zeng Zi. 
-   Self-cultivating oneself, leads to peaceful governance.
{:.verse}

-   孝經通，四書熟。如六經，始可讀。詩書易，禮春秋。號六經，當講求。
-   Xiào jīng tōng, sì shū shú. 
-   Rú liù jīng, shǐ kě dú. 
-   Shīshū yì, lǐ chūnqiū. 
-   Hào liù jīng, dāng jiǎngqiú.
-   
-   When the *Classic of Filial Piety* understood, and familiar with the Four Classical texts,
-   with regard to the *Six Classics*, they are now fathomable.
-   The books of Poetry, History, Changes, Rites, Rites of Zhou and the Spring and Autumn Annals,
-   Tally the *Six Classics*, all should be thoroughly understood.
{:.verse}

-   有連山，有歸藏。有周易，三易詳。
-   Yǒu liánshān, yǒu guī cáng. 
-   Yǒu zhōuyì, sān yì xiáng.
-   
-   There is the Lianshan, there is the Guicang
-   There is the Zhouyi, all explaining the I Ching.
{:.verse}

-   有典謨，有訓誥。有誓命，書之奧。
-   Yǒu diǎn mó, yǒu xùn gào. 
-   Yǒu shì mìng, shū zhī ào. 
-   
-   There are laws and plans, there are instructions and proclaimations,    
-   there are orders and commands, profound teachings within the *Book of Documents*.
{:.verse}

-   我周公，作周禮。著六官，存治體。
-   Wǒ zhōugōng, zuò zhōu lǐ.
-   Zhe liù guān, cún zhì tǐ.
-   
-   Our Duke of Zhou composed the *Rites of Zhou*,
-   Declaring six officials, preserving a governance structure.
{:.verse}

-   大小戴，注禮記。述聖言，禮樂備。
-   Dàxiǎo dài, zhù lǐjì. 
-   Shù shèng yán, lǐ yuè bèi.
-   
-   The elder and younger Dai, annotated the *Record of Rites*,
-   Telling of Sagely words, and prepartions for ceremonies and music.
{:.verse}

-   曰國風，曰雅頌。號四詩，當諷詠。詩既亡，春秋作。寓褒貶，別善惡。
-   Yuē guó fēng, yuē yǎ sòng. 
-   Hào sì shī, dāng fěngyǒng. 
-   Shī jì wáng, chūnqiū zuò. 
-   Yù bāobiǎn, bié shàn è.
-   
-   Speaking of the *Airs of the States*, speaking of the Hymns and Odes,
-   The four sections of the *Book of Poetry*, should be recited and sung.
-   When the *Book of Poetry* was forgotten, the *Spring and Autumn Annals* were written.
-   Containing approvals and disapprovals, distinguishing good from evil.  
{:.verse}

-   三傳者，有公羊。有左氏，有彀梁。經既明，方讀子。撮其要，記其事。
-   Sān chuán zhě, yǒu gōng yáng. 
-   Yǒu zuǒ shì, yǒu gòu liáng. 
-   Jīng jì míng, fāng dú zǐ. 
-   Cuō qí yào, jì qí shì. 
-   
-   Three commentaries made: there is the *Gongyang*, 
-   there is the *Zuo*, there is the *Guliang*.   
-   When the Classics are understood, only then read the Philosophers.  
-   Extract the essentials and remember the principles.
{:.verse}

-   五子者，有荀楊。文中子，及老莊。
-   Wǔzǐ zhě, yǒu xún yáng. Wénzhōng zǐ, jí lǎo zhuāng.
-   
-   Five great philosophers: there is Xun (Zi), Yang (Zhu),
-   Wen Zhong Zi, Lao(zi), and Zhuang(zi).
{:.verse}

-   經子通，讀諸史。考世系，知終始。
-   Jīng zǐ tōng, dú zhū shǐ. 
-   Kǎo shìxì, zhī zhōngshǐ.
-   
-   The Classics and Philosophies understood, read up on history.
-   Examine the lineages, knowing beginnings and ends.
{:.verse}

-   自羲農，至黃帝。號三皇，居上世。
-   Zì xī nóng, zhì huángdì. 
-   Hào sān huáng, jū shàng shì.
-   
-   From (Fu)xi and (Shen)Nong, to the Huang Di (Yellow Emperor),
-   Number the Three Sovereigns, residing a long time ago. 
{:.verse}

-   唐有虞，號二帝。相揖遜，稱盛世。
-   Táng yǒu yú, hào èr dì. 
-   Xiāng yī xùn, chēng shèngshì.
-   
-   Tang and Yu, number the Two Emperors.
-   Abdicating peacefully to the other, marking an Age of Prosperity.
{:.verse}

-   夏有禹，商有湯。周文王，稱三王。
-   Xiàyǒuyǔ, shāng yǒu tāng.
-   Zhōuwén wáng, chēng sān wáng.
-   
-   Xia had Yu, Shang had Tang,
-   And King Wen of Zhou, are named the Three Kings.
{:.verse}

-   夏傳子，家天下。四百載，遷夏社。
-   Xiàchuánzǐ, jiā tiānxià. 
-   Sìbǎi zài, qiān xià shè.
-   
-   Xia passed from father to son, a family ruling Heaven under.
-   400 years after, the Xia declined.
{:.verse}

-   湯伐夏，國號商。六百載，至紂亡。
-   Tāng fá xià, guóhào shāng. 
-   Liùbǎi zài, zhì zhòu wáng.
-   
-   Tang dethroned Xia, named the nation Shang.
-   600 years after, until King Zhou (Di Xin) passed.
{:.verse}

-   周武王，始誅紂。八百載，最長久。
-   Zhōu wǔwáng, shǐ zhū zhòu. 
-   Bābǎi zài, zuì chángjiǔ.
-   
-   King Wu of Zhou's dynasty, began with Zhou's death. 
-   800 years long, the longest dynasty.
{:.verse}

-   周轍東，王綱墮。逞干戈，尚遊說。
-   Zhōu zhé dōng, wáng gāng duò. 
-   Chěng gāngē, shàng yóushuì.
-   
-   When Zhou moved East, the King's power weakened.
-   Giving way to war weapons, and numerous differing politics.
{:.verse}

-   始春秋，終戰國。五霸強，七雄出。
-   Shǐ chūnqiū, zhōng zhànguó. 
-   Wǔ bà qiáng, qīxióng chū.
-   
-   Starting the Spring and Autumn period, ending with the Warring States,
-   Where five lords and seven powers emerged.
{:.verse}

-   嬴秦氏，始兼併。傳二世，楚漢爭。
-   Yíng qín shì, shǐ jiānbìng. 
-   Chuán èr shì, chǔ hàn zhēng.
-   
-   Ying led the Qin family, began to annex the nation.
-   Passed to Er Shi, Chu and Han fought for power.
{:.verse}

-   高祖興，漢業建。至孝平，王莽篡。
-   Gāozǔ xìng, hàn yè jiàn. 
-   Zhì xiàopíng, wángmǎng cuàn.
-   
-   Emperor Gaozu prevailed, the Han dynasty establised,
-   Enduring until Xiao Ping, when Wang Mang usurped the throne.
{:.verse}

-   光武興，為東漢。四百年，終於獻。
-   Guāngwǔ xìng, wèi dōnghàn. 
-   Sìbǎi nián, zhōngyú xiàn.
-   
-   Guangwu succeeded, forming the Eastern Han,
-   Lasting 400 years, ending with (Emperor) Xian.
{:.verse}

-   魏蜀吳，爭漢鼎。號三國，迄兩晉。
-   Wèi shǔ wú, zhēng hàn dǐng. 
-   Hào sānguó, qì liǎngjìn.
-   
-   Wei, Shu, and Wu, strived for the Han control,
-   Called the Three Kingdoms, followed by the two Jin (dynasties).
{:.verse}

-   宋齊繼，梁陳承。為南朝，都金陵。
-   Sòngqíjì, liáng chén chéng. 
-   Wèi náncháo, dōu jīnlíng.
-   
-   The Song and Qi succeeded, followed by Liang and Chen,
-   Became the Southern Dynasties, centered in Jinling.
{:.verse}

-   北元魏，分東西。宇文周，興高齊。
-   Běi yuán wèi, fēn dōngxī. 
-   Yǔwén zhōu, xìng gāo qí.
-   
-   Up north, Yuan and Wei, split into East and West.
-   Yu Wen of Zhou, succeeded alongside Gao of Qi.
{:.verse}

-   迨至隋，一土宇。不再傳，失統緒。
-   Dài zhì suí, yī tǔ yǔ. 
-   Bù zài chuán, shī tǒng xù.
-   
-   Until the arrival of the Sui, unifying the land,
-   but power wasn't transferred, thereby losing control.
{:.verse}

-   唐高祖，起義師。除隋亂，創國基。
-   Táng gāozǔ, qǐyì shī. 
-   Chú suí luàn, chuàng guó jī.
-   
-   Emperor Gaozu of Tang, raised righteous troops,
-   Overthrew the chaotic Sui, establishing the nation's foundations.
{:.verse}

-   二十傳，三百載。梁滅之，國乃改。
-   Èrshí chuán, sānbǎi zài. 
-   Liáng miè zhī, guó nǎi gǎi.
-   
-   Twenty emperors in succession, in 300 years time,
-   Liang's rebellion ended it, the country thus changed.
{:.verse}

-   梁唐晉，及漢周。稱五代，皆有由。
-   Liángtángjìn, jí hàn zhōu. 
-   Chēng wǔdài, jiē yǒu yóu.   
-   
-   Liang, Tang, Jin,
-   also Han, and Zhou
-   Named the Five Dynasties,
-   each following their own.
{:.verse}

-   炎宋興，受周禪。十八傳，南北混。
-   Yán sòng xìng, shòu zhōu chán. 
-   Shíbā chuán, nánběi hùn.
-   
-   The fiery Song arose, due to Zhou's abdication,
-   Eighteen times power transferred, north and south in seperated.
{:.verse}

-   遼與金，皆稱帝。元滅金，絕宋世。
-   Liáo yǔ jīn, jiē chēng dì. 
-   Yuán miè jīn, jué sòng shì.
-   
-   Liao and Jin, both claimed emperorship.
-   Yuan destroyed the Jin, ending the Song line.
{:.verse}

-   太祖興，國大明。號洪武，都金陵。
-   Tài zǔ xìng, guó dàmíng. 
-   Hào hóngwǔ, dōu jīnlíng.  
-   
-   Taizu arose, the great nation of Ming.
-   Named Hong Wu, the capital at Jinling.
{:.verse}

-   迨成祖，遷燕京。十六世，至崇禎。
-   Dài chéngzǔ, qiān yàn jīng. 
-   Shíliù shì, zhì chóngzhēn.
-   
-   Until Chengzu, who moved it to Beijing.
-   Sixteen generations after, until Chongzhen.
{:.verse}

-   閹亂後，寇內訌。闖逆變，神器終。
-   Yān luàn hòu, kòu nèihòng. 
-   Chuǎng nì biàn, shénqì zhōng.
-   
-   After Eunuchs razed chaos, creating internal strife,
-   (Li Zicheng) Chuang Ni Bian rebelled, divine artifacts destroyed.
{:.verse}

-   清順治，據神京。至十傳，宣統遜。
-   Qīng shùnzhì, jù shén jīng. 
-   Zhì shí chuán, xuāntǒng xùn.
-   
-   Qing began at Shunzhi, seizing the capital.
-   After ten rulers, Xuantong abdicated.
{:.verse}

-   舉總統，共和成。復漢土，民國興。
-   Jǔ zǒngtǒng, gònghé chéng. 
-   Fù hàn tǔ, mínguó xìng.
-   
-   Appointed a president, the Republic established.
-   Restoring the Han lands, the Republic prospers.
{:.verse}

-   廿二史，全在茲。載治亂，知興衰。 
-   Niàn èr shǐ, quán zài zī.
-   Zài zhì luàn, zhī xīngshuāi.
-   
-   Twenty-two histories, all contained here,
-   Recording governance and chaos, know the rise and fall.
{:.verse}

-   讀史書，考實錄。通古今，若親目。
-   Dú shǐshū, kǎo shílù. 
-   Tōng gǔjīn, ruò qīn mù.
-   
-   Read history books, examine the records.
-   Connecting the past to the present, as if a close witness.
{:.verse}

-   口而誦，心而惟。朝於斯，夕於斯。
-   Kǒu ér sòng, xīn ér wéi.
-   Cháo yú sī, xī yú sī.
-   
-   Recite by mouth, reflect with heart,
-   In the morning, into the evening. 
{:.verse}

-   昔仲尼，師項橐。古聖賢，尚勤學。
-   Xī zhòng ní, shī xiàng tuó.
-   Gǔ shèngxián, shàng qín xué.
-   
-   (Confucius) Xi Zhongni, learned from Xiang Tuo.
-   The ancient sages of virtue, valued diligence in learning.
{:.verse}

-   趙中令，讀魯論。彼既仕，學且勤。
-   Zhào zhōnglìng, dú lǔ lùn. 
-   Bǐ jì shì, xué qiě qín.
-   
-   Grand Minister Zhao, studied the Analects.
-   Even while holding office, studied more diligently.
{:verse}

-   披蒲編，削竹簡。彼無書，且知勉。
-   Pī pú biān, xuē zhújiǎn. 
-   Bǐ wú shū, qiě zhī miǎn.
-   
-   Wrapping books in reeds, carving texts on bamboo,
-   They had no books, but still persevered to learn.
{:.verse}

-   頭懸梁，錐刺股。彼不教，自勤苦。
-   Tóu xuánliáng, zhuī cìgǔ. 
-   Bǐ bù jiào, zì qínkǔ.
-   
-   Hanging one’s head from a beam, pricking one’s thigh with an awl,
-   These methods were not taught, devised from desiring to work hard.
{:.verse}

-   如囊螢，如映雪。家雖貧，學不綴。
-   Rú náng yíng, rú yìng xuě. 
-   Jiā suī pín, xué bù zhuì.
-   
-   By using the glow of fireflies, by using the snow's reflection,
-   Their home improvised, yet they never ceased learning.
{:.verse}

-   如負薪，如掛角。身雖勞，猶苦卓。
-   Rú fù xīn, rú guà jiǎo. 
-   Shēn suī láo, yóu kǔ zhuó.
-   
-   One carried firewood, another hung horns (for books),
-   Though their bodies exhausted, yet outstandingly persisted.
{:.verse}

-   蘇老泉，二十七。始發憤，讀書籍。
-   Sū lǎo quán, èrshíqī. 
-   Shǐ fāfèn, dú shūjí.
-   
-   Su Laoquan, at twenty-seven,
-   Started ardently to read books.
{:.verse}

-   彼既老，猶悔遲。爾小生，宜早思。
-   Bǐ jì lǎo, yóu huǐ chí. 
-   Ěr xiǎoshēng, yí zǎo sī.
-   
-   He was already old, he regretted his delay,
-   You, the young student, ought to consider this early.
{:.verse}

-   若梁灝，八十二。對大廷，魁多士。
-   Ruò liáng hào, bāshí'èr. 
-   Duì dà tíng, kuí duō shì.
-   
-   Like Liang Hao, at 82 years old,
-   Impressed the Great Hall, acclaimed as head student.
{:.verse} 

-   彼既成，眾稱異。爾小生，宜立志。
-   Bǐ jìchéng, zhòng chēng yì. 
-   Ěr xiǎoshēng, yí lìzhì.
-   
-   After all his accomplishments, many praised his talents,
-   You, the young student, ought to be as ambitious.
{:.verse}

-   瑩八歲，能詠詩。泌七歲，能賦棋。
-   Yíng bā suì, néng yǒng shī. 
-   Mì qī suì, néng fù qí.
-   
-   Ying, at eight, could write poetry.
-   Mi, at seven, could write about chess.
{:.verse}

-   彼穎悟，人稱奇。爾幼學，當效之。
-   Bǐ yǐngwù, rén chēngqí. 
-   Ěr yòu xué, dāng xiào zhī.
-   
-   They were intelligent and bright, people praised their abilities
-   You, the young student, ought to emulate them.
{:.verse}

-   蔡文姬，能辨琴。謝道韞，能詠吟。
-   Càiwénjī, néng biàn qín. 
-   Xièdàoyùn, néng yǒng yín.
-   
-   Cai Wenji, could distinguish the qin,
-   Xie Daoyun, could compose poetry.
{:.verse}

-   彼女子，且聰敏。爾男子，當自警。
-   Bǐnǚ zǐ, qiě cōngmǐn. 
-   Ěr nánzǐ, dāng zìjǐng.
-   
-   There were girls who were more clever,
-   You boys, should be self-diligent.
{:.verse}

-   唐劉晏，方七歲。舉神童，作正字。
-   Táng liúyàn, fāng qī suì. 
-   Jǔ shéntóng, zuò zhèngzì.
-   
-   Liu Yan of the Tang, at the age of seven,
-   Recognized as a child prodigy, became the corrector of writings.
{:.verse}

-   彼雖幼，身己仕。爾幼學，勉而致。
-   Bǐ suī yòu, shēn jǐ shì.
-   Ěr yòu xué, miǎn ér zhì.
-   
-   Although he was young, he was already an official.
-   You, the young student, should strive for the same.
{:.verse}

-   有為者，亦若是。 犬守夜，雞司晨。苟不學，曷為人。
-   Yǒu wéi zhě, yì ruòshì. 
-   Quǎn shǒuyè, jī sī chén.
-   Gǒu bù xué, hé wéi rén. 
-   
-   Those who make an effort, will succeed as they did.
-   Dogs guard at night; roosters crow at dawn.
-   If one does not study, how can one act as a person?
{:.verse}

-   蠶吐絲，蜂釀蜜。人不學，不如物。
-   Cán tǔ sī, fēng niàng mì. 
-   Rén bù xué, bùrú wù.
-   
-   Silkworms spin silk, and bees make honey.
-   People that don't learn, are no better than objects.
{:.verse}

-   幼而學，壯而行。上致君，下澤民。
-   Yòu ér xué, zhuàng ér xíng. 
-   Shàng zhì jūn, xiàzé mín.
-   
-   Learn while young, act when grown.
-   Serve those above noblely, bring blessings to people below.
{:.verse}

-   揚名聲，顯父母。光於前，裕於後。
-   Yángmíng shēng, xiǎn fùmǔ. 
-   Guāng yú qián, yù yú hòu.
-   
-   Become a great voice, honor your parents,
-   Shed light on the past, leave prosperity for the future.
{:.verse}

-   人遺子，金滿嬴。我教子，惟一經。
-   Rén yí zǐ, jīn mǎn yíng. 
-   Wǒ jiàozǐ, wéiyī jīng. 
-   
-   Others may leave gold for their children,
-   But I teach my children with the classics alone.
-   
-   勤有功，戲無益。戒之哉，宜勉力。
-   Qín yǒugōng, xì wúyì. 
-   Jiè zhī zāi, yí miǎnlì.
-   
-   Diligence leads to success, play brings no benefits.
-   Take heed, and strive to make an effort.
{:.verse}